[ Music ]
>> Lisa Garr: Hi.
This is Lisa Garr, host
of  Gaiam Inspirations .
So how often have you
experienced something
that goes wrong and you say
to yourself, "I knew that,"
or, "I knew that was
going to happen?"
Well, this is your
intuition talking to you.
How much do you live your
life by that intuition
in your businesses
and your health?
Joining me to talk about
intuition and natural success
is the author of The Magician's
Way and The Last Shaman ,
William Whitecloud. [laughter]
I think I just called you
the last shaman, didn't I?
>> William Whitecloud: Well,
it's a title I'm not adverse to.
That's okay.
Thanks, Lisa.
>> Lisa: How did
you get the title
of your book, The Last Shaman ?
>> Whitecloud: The title of
the book The Last Shaman ?
Well, you see, the book The
Last Shaman basically conveys
ideas about the fact
that really, in truth,
we're being guided through life,
if we are open to connecting
with that reality
and that truth.
And so, basically, it's
a function of intuition
and connecting with
your intuition
and then living life guided
by your intuition, basically.
And so, I wanted to
convey this -- these ideas.
And I just -- I convey all
of my ideas through story, and
I just really needed a story to
convey these particular ideas.
And was in South Africa and
my brother introduced me
to Africa's foremost
rock art expert,
a guy called Victor Biggs,
and he took my wife and I,
Christian, out into the field
and was absolutely fascinating
and he taught us all about
the Bushmen Paintings.
And, you know, when I was
growing up, I saw them all
over Africa and I thought --
we all thought, as white folk,
you know, ignorant white folk,
thought that they
depicted stories of hunting
and tribal warfare
and all of that.
And in fact, it's not true.
Every single piece of
rock art is a depiction
of a shamanic journey
into the other world.
>> Lisa: Oh, wow.
>> Whitecloud: And so, I
thought, you know, this is --
and for the three purposes,
the purpose of gaining wisdom,
making rain, and
also for healing.
And so, I thought this
would be a fantastic story
if I could get my character
that I always use, Mark Vale,
to go on one of these
journeys into the other world
and then come back with --
and through this journey
learn all this knowledge
that I want to teach, you see?
And then, come back and
apply it in the world.
And so, it's a story, therefore,
by these characters searching
for mythical last
shaman, the last shaman...
>> Lisa: Oh.
>> Whitecloud: of this tribe,
and hence the title.
>> Lisa: Ah, I see.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
Yeah.
>> Lisa: So now, you take people
on journeys through Africa and.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah. I do,
and I take them on the Last
Shaman experience, basically,
because I take them to this
region where I set my book.
I used the place where
I grew up in Africa
as the setting of the book.
>> Lisa: Which was in?
>> Whitecloud: In Swaziland.
And I live in a very -- grew
up in a very interesting part
of Africa and also
where I now take people.
And it's this triangle.
It's the corner of South Africa,
Mozambique, and Swaziland.
And it's very interesting in
many ways, in the sense also
that it's the end of the
Great Rift Valley of Africa,
where we all sprung
from, I think.
That's -- you know, and where
we go, for instance, that is --
they have found the second
oldest site of human habitation.
So the atmosphere of the sense
of history there is incredible,
as well as the wilderness
and the very special type
of tribespeople that live
there and the wildlife.
I mean, it literally is
the wildest place on Earth.
It's most predator-rich
place on Earth.
And so, it has incredible
energy, incredible atmosphere.
And so, I take people
back there, to the setting
and take them through also
all these teachings that are
in my book The Last
Shaman as well.
It's an amazing experience.
>> Lisa: Okay.
So we have some pictures of
you on one of these journeys,
these safaris, this
place of origin.
>> Whitecloud: Yes.
>> Lisa: And I noticed that
the Jeep in the background,
in comparison to these gigantic
animals, are these babies?
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
These are babies,
blocking our road.
We couldn't get past
them in this instance.
But it's just incredible.
You -- where we go
and when we go out,
it's just an incredible
experience
because these are not
tamed zoo animals.
They're really wild animals,
but they've been habituated
to that type of vehicle.
So when that type
of vehicle comes by,
they actually act as
if it's fresh air.
Their relationship
to it is fresh air.
So you can get right
close to them
so you can follow
big cats hunting,
you know, mating, fighting.
>> Lisa: Is it like a show?
It's like show time
when those Jeeps.
>> Whitecloud: It absolutely is.
Because.
>> Lisa: Wow.
>> Whitecloud: Because you
go out there and, you know,
the average person will
drive through that country
and just experience it as seeing
a random thing here and there.
But actually, when you stay
there for a while and you get
to know the animals
and what's going on,
there's this whole drama being
played out between them all.
And their characters and
personalities and power games
and it's just like -- and -- the
most incredible show on Earth.
It really is.
>> Lisa: When you --
when you're out there,
do you talk about how
this simulates life
and how those dramas
play out in life?
>> Whitecloud: The
relevance of that setting
to what I teach people
is just simply this.
Is that when we go
out there, this --
the atmosphere of this
place, which is made
up by the wilderness, the
land, the wild animals,
and the people, very
authentic people, is that we go
into a concept-free zone.
It's indescribable, really.
But it's hard to describe
to the average person,
but when you go there,
you realize that actually
human beings accumulate a lot
of concepts, a lot of constructs
that are very limiting.
>> Lisa: Such as?
>> Whitecloud: They're
just fixed constructs.
Well, you know, for instance,
I don't want to, you know,
alienate anyone here, but
a very interesting thing is
that we inevitably on every trip
we go out on, we have vegans.
And to me, you know, vegans are
really the most rigid dietary
type in the sense
that, you know,
they're very dedicated
to their philosophy.
And it's nothing
against veganism here,
I hope I'm not getting
into trouble here,
but it's just a fact
that every vegan
that we've taken has not lasted.
They might have been practicing
for 16 years very rigidly
and yet, when they come
into this situation,
their veganism lasts about three
days before they're eating all
kinds of meat and
dairy products.
>> Lisa: Because there's
nothing else to eat or because?
>> Whitecloud: No.
No. No. In fact, the opposite.
We go to a lot of trouble to
cater to their dietary needs,
you know, whatever they are.
And it's not easy in these
remote parts of Africa,
so we go to a lot of trouble.
And in spite of all the trouble
we go to, it's just, you know,
whatever causes people to
espouse, whatever theories
that they hold, pet theories
and notions they have,
they just fall off people.
>> Lisa: Interesting.
>> Whitecloud: Like
water melting off them,
drying off them in the sun.
Because it's an environment
where, as I said,
it's a concept-free zone.
Your concepts of life...
>> Lisa: Interesting.
>> Whitecloud: ...can't survive.
So only what is really
authentic to you survives,
and that is what is most
relevant about the setting.
It's an incredible setting.
And if anyone ever wants
to come back to themselves
and just experience themselves
for who they really are
and experience life just
for what it is and have
that raw connection to life...
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Whitecloud: ...this
is the thing to do.
This is the place to go to.
It does that to people, really.
>> Lisa: I love this
picture of the giraffes
and how the people are...
>> Whitecloud: Ah, yes.
>> Lisa: ...so close
to the giraffes.
But when you see something that
massive and beautiful right next
to you, it really does have
to blow your constructs of.
>> Whitecloud: When you
see it on TV, I was just --
someone was just saying this
to me on Facebook today,
because they're responding to
a picture I had up on Facebook,
and they said, "I know
what you're talking
about here, William.
I know what you're showing
us because I was there."
>> Lisa: Ah.
>> Whitecloud: And when you see
this on TV, it looks so great
and all that, but
when you're there,
it just takes your breath away.
Like for instance, these
giraffes here, I mean,
where we go, they're everywhere
and they call them the
dolphins of the land.
They're just -- they're energy's
like dolphinic, you know?
And we will be -- they're wild.
They're not tame.
But we'll be swimming
in these swimming pools
out in the bush cooling
off and they'll just walk
out of the bush and come and
have a drink out of the pool
that you're swimming in.
Or you go for a walk
through the bush
and you hear these feet clopping
behind you and you look around
and there's a giraffe
following you through the bush.
And then, when you
stop, it stops
and when you carry
on, it carries on.
>> Lisa: So they're playful.
>> Whitecloud: Ah,
they're very playful,
and inquisitive as
well, you see.
>> Lisa: Wow.
>> Whitecloud: And,
you know, as you say,
it's breathtaking and just so...
>> Lisa: That.
>> Whitecloud: ...awe-inspiring
and just clears your mind
of everything that
you've ever held before.
And, you know, everyone out
there in the world's trying
to follow all these spiritual
ideas about, you know,
being in the moment
and being present
and coming back to themselves.
But you just go there and
it just does it to you.
It's -- it takes you prisoner
and you have no other
way of being.
It's incredible.
>> Lisa: It strips
away everything.
>> Whitecloud: And also,
the thing about it is also
the learning environment,
your ability then to
absorb teachings and relate
to them is enhanced, you know,
to the power of a thousand.
It really is great.
>> Lisa: Tell me a
little bit about --
take me back to your
childhood and growing up.
You had developed quite a
serious illness, as I remember.
>> Whitecloud: Well,
actually, in adulthood.
>> Lisa: In adulthood?
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
In adulthood.
I had a 10-year illness
that took me
to my deathbed literally.
I mean, I was receiving
deathbed counseling.
I was really in a bad way.
And the intriguing thing
about the illness was
it was undiagnosed.
Nobody knew what was.
>> Lisa: What were the symptoms?
>> Whitecloud: You know, I
mean, I remember doing a test
that listed 200 symptoms and
I had them all, you know,
from tension headaches
and nausea
to memory loss, poor vision.
I mean, you name it.
Sores all over me, weight loss.
>> Lisa: How old were you?
>> Whitecloud: It occurred
my mid-20s to my mid-30s.
>> Lisa: Oh, wow.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
>> Lisa: So young.
And.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
Yeah.
>> Lisa: And you didn't
-- it wasn't a virus,
it wasn't -- it was diagnosed.
>> Whitecloud: I don't
know what it was.
It could have been --
who knows what it was,
but it was never
diagnosed and as a result,
no cure was ever prescribed.
And -- but I did meet a person
10 years down the track,
actually, who really, when --
I had just received the deathbed
counseling session a day
or two before, and
being persuaded
by this little old lady with,
you know, white hair to go --
not fear anything and
go towards the light.
She was encouraging me to
let go of my mortal coil
and allow myself to die.
>> Lisa: Wow.
>> Whitecloud: And just a
couple of days after that,
I somehow had enough energy
to go outside and I met a guy,
a stranger, who I
got talking to.
And because of my health,
very obviously the --
my situation, very obviously,
the conversation turned
quickly to my health.
And, you know, he could have
knocked me down with a feather
because the first person
in 10 years, he said,
"I know what's wrong with you.
And not only do I know
what's wrong with you,
but I also have the
cure for you"
>> Lisa: Where were you?
What country?
>> Whitecloud: In Australia.
>> Lisa: Australia.
Okay.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
And anyway, he -- from
what he described to me,
I was in no doubt whatsoever
that he had had what I had
because he was describing
my condition to me,
which I had been absolutely
unable to relate to anyone,
whether they were psychiatrists
or doctors or family.
>> Lisa: Wow.
>> Whitecloud: Just nobody
could appreciate what I was
going through.
And here was a guy telling
me what he had experienced
and suffered.
And I believed him
without a doubt
that he had had what I had.
And so, then he told me the
cure was for me to eat red meat
and drink white wine and smoke
a few cigarettes every day
and have a few cups
of coffee every day.
And he said if I did that,
I'd be fine very quickly.
>> Lisa: And the -- and you did?
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
I mean, I haven't
got time here today.
We don't have time for me to go
into how confronting this was
to me, because that was anathema
to everything I had been told
and had been eliminated
from my thinking,
nevermind my intake, ages ago.
But, you know, I overcame
that because, you know,
various reasons,
among them being
that he was the only person
I had related to in 10 years
and I had some connection
to him.
But I did.
I did that.
>> Lisa: Had you been a vegan
or vegetarian prior to that?
Or?
>> Whitecloud: No.
No. But, I mean, all --
because of my health situation
and because of the advice I had
received, obviously, you know,
you put on -- it's very typical.
Whenever something like that is
wrong with you, you'll be put
on vitamins, you'll be told to.
>> Lisa: Diet.
Change your diet.
>> Whitecloud: Change
your diet, you know.
Alcohol, nicotine, caffeine; all
of those things are no go zones.
And so, for years, I hadn't
touched anything like that
and believed that if
I did, I would die.
>> Lisa: Die.
Right.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
And so, I threw all caution
to the wind and I took him
up on his prescription
and I did.
I got well instantly.
I mean, you know, you
-- because you think --
if you go downhill over
10 years to a point
where you reach your deathbed,
you think that if ever you find
out what's wrong with you
and you find the cure,
it'll take years for
you to come back.
But I came back in, you
know, literally days.
>> Lisa: Days.
>> Whitecloud: Days.
It took me months to put back
all the weight and all of that,
but my mental faculties and,
you know, my wits and everything
that I had lost, just -- my
energy was just back in days.
I mean, within a week I
was bouncing around looking
for a soccer game to join in.
>> Lisa: How did you
transition from this illness
into then becoming a teacher?
How did you bridge that gap?
>> Whitecloud: Well,
very easily.
Because when I recovered
from my illness,
I thought about my recovery
a lot, as you can imagine.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: It
preoccupied all of my thinking.
And when I thought
about it, it never --
I never believed really for
a minute that it had anything
to do with the prescription,
with the meat or the alcohol
or the nicotine or the caffeine.
What dawned on me, and I never
thought about this before,
because I had grown up in the
bush in Africa and I didn't know
that you could string the words
personal and development...
>> Lisa: Together?
>> Whitecloud: ...or spiritual
or development together.
You know, I didn't know.
I mean...
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Whitecloud: ...even back
then, Deepak Chopra and people
like that were starting
to emerge.
But for me, I had never come
across that kind of thinking.
And -- but what occurred
to me just
so powerfully was there must
be some way in which I focus
or that I think that then
affects my experience of life.
Because I'd just been so focused
on being ill and trying to
better, but really, the
focus was being ill.
And so, I just got more
and more and more ill.
And then, when I just, you know,
by taking up that prescription,
what I really did was just
went, you know, what the hell?
I don't care anymore.
And I just got better
immediately.
And whether it was the right
conclusion to make
or the wrong conclusion,
I still don't know because
people argue with me about that
and I don't have any argument.
I don't care.
It's just the conclusion I made
as a result of that experience.
And so, then, I was dedicated,
became obsessed in a way,
of finding out how
this principle worked
because it just was a
vague idea in my mind.
So how does this principle
work so that I could --
that I can use it formally
to create my heaven
on Earth instead of
this hell on Earth
that I had just been through.
>> Lisa: And the
principle being?
>> Whitecloud: Well, that your
focus creates your reality,
basically.
And I didn't even
have that language.
You know, of all the
people in the world,
my accountant gave me that
phrase.
Because I was trying to explain
to him my insight and he said
to me, "Oh, so you're telling me
that our focus creates
our reality?"
I nearly hugged him.
I was going, "That's
exactly what I mean."
>> Lisa: Oh.
>> Whitecloud: You see?
And.
>> Lisa: So he fed
that back to you.
>> Whitecloud: Exactly.
And as I say, my
accountant of all people.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: And he told
me about courses and books
that I could read and
courses that I could do,
which I didn't know existed.
And so, I began an investigation
of this whole idea
and this whole field.
And what it led me to
instantly was alchemy.
And so, that's what I
followed for the last 20 years,
is my investigation
and study and practice
and teachings all center around
basically the philosophies
of hermetic philosophy.
>> Lisa: Which is alchemy.
Explain that.
>> Whitecloud: Well, hermetic
philosophy is a strand
of alchemy, which
I've since discovered.
I'm blessed that I was led
straight to it, I think,
because I've since discovered
that, you know, academics
and philosophers and
mythologists all consider it
to be the alchemy
par excellence.
And so, it, you know, it's
a mind science basically.
And it really teaches
us about how focus --
our focus does create
our reality
and how we can pay
attention in a way
that we can create what
matters to us in life.
>> Lisa: So explain
what alchemy is
for people that might not know.
It's got an incredibly
transformative power, yes?
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
And, you know, I
think it's going
to be an interesting
time ahead of us
where I think alchemy
will come to be explained
in its true nature
and true form.
Because I think people
think of alchemy in a sort
of very mystic, hooey, kind
of way; in a very cliched,
symbolic way where you've
got this idea about that,
in one sense, it's a chemical --
it's about transforming literal
materials of lead into gold.
>> Lisa: Lead into gold.
Yeah. That's right.
>> Whitecloud: Or
something like that.
But it's not.
It's, you know, the lead is
just a metaphor for our kind
of lower egoic nature and the
gold is higher authentic nature
or personal genius that
we can all achieve really.
And, you know, you don't really
hear much about it at all.
But I've never seen it anywhere
really publically in any kind
of story or book
or any form really.
But the essence of
alchemy is a principle --
the principles of nigredo,
albedo, and rubedo,
which is black, white,
and red, basically.
And you see, it's all about
making the fixed volatile
and the volatile
fixed, which means --
let me just explain quickly,
make sense of this very soon.
Is that nigredo is our dense
self, our fixed egoic structure,
our sense of, you know,
belief system and all
of that, our concepts.
And yeah. Just limited
perceptions
of life that we have.
And so, alchemy -- what alchemy
is about is about breaking
that down, making
the fixed volatile.
So breaking that down and
escaping that and rising
up into the light,
into the white,
which is our intuition,
basically.
It is our higher consciousness.
And then, being able to have
a perspective from that place
and being able to see the light,
as it were, and being able
to operate from that
higher perspective.
And then, the rubedo is the
red, which is the color of Mars.
It's this -- it's the masculine
will so that we then --
we break down our egoic
way of seeing things,
rise up to our intuition, and
see the higher perspective,
which is, you know, conflicts
with our egoic perception.
And therefore, we have to
have a will to actually claim
that dream-like perception,
insight as our reality
and follow through on that.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: And so,
basically, you know, really,
in a nutshell, although there's
a whole science
and art behind it,
but in a nutshell, that is the
art or the science of alchemy.
>> Lisa: So it applies
to everything in life.
I can see how you got
to teaching something
called natural success,
which we're going to
talk a little bit about,
is how to take the --
how to transform
something in the physical,
but really using the
magic of the universe
in order to make it happen.
Not even the magic of the
universe, but other dimensions
in order to make it happen.
This is something that I've
been exploring myself recently.
So tell me about
how this applies
to what you call
natural success.
>> Whitecloud: Well, thank you
for giving me the opportunity
because it's my favorite
subject to talk about.
>> Lisa: Well, it's
a great title.
>> Whitecloud: Natural success.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
You see, typically, I
think, the kind of success
that I see largely
being attained
in the world is achievement
that --
and the type of success that
I call high achievement,
which comes from a lot of
effort and hard work...
>> Lisa: Will.
>> Whitecloud: ...and
willfulness...
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Whitecloud: ...and, you know.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: You could
even say effort and struggle.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Whitecloud: Whereas,
you know,
and that's one kind
of achievement.
But it's kind of a,
you know, in a sense,
a pigheaded type of approach.
>> Lisa: Well, it's how
businesses are structured
these days...
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
>> Lisa: ...with
graphs and goals
and projections and -- yeah.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
And, you know, it's
not only businesses.
All kinds of personal
achievements as well,
and our approach
to relationships
for just life in general.
>> Lisa: True.
>> Whitecloud: But you see,
what I mean by natural success
is a success that's achieved
through creativity.
Yeah. And, you know,
creativity, by any definition,
really you could distill down to
the ability to make connections
that aren't usually made.
I mean, if you think about
any genius who invents
or creates anything, whether
it's Andy Warhol, who does,
you know, incredible silk
screens that are different
to anything that's ever been
done before, or takes a can
of soup and makes
something iconic out of it.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Whitecloud: Or
whether it's Einstein,
who figures out there are black
holes in space before there are
radio telescopes that
can identify them.
You see, they're making
connections that...
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Whitecloud: ...the
average person isn't making.
>> Lisa: At the stratospheric
level.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Whitecloud: And
so, when one breaks
out of one's normal
patterned way of thinking,
you start making connections
that then start making life
a whole lot more effortless
and effective as well.
Because, you know, the way
the conditioned mind works,
it gets from A to B by going to
C to D to E to F to G to H to I
to J to K, and back around...
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Whitecloud: ...Z and back to.
>> Lisa: Details.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
>> Lisa: Absolutely.
>> Whitecloud: And.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: And when you go
into your more creative mind,
you just -- you start
seeing through all of that
and you see a lot more directly.
You start seeing just how
much more directly you can go
and you start going
from A to B, from --
literally from A to B a
whole lot more directly.
>> Lisa: This is so
interesting to me because it's
about creating an
entirely different level.
>> Whitecloud: It is.
Yeah.
>> Lisa: I always used to
see that phrase of creating
with ease and effortlessness,
and I used to say how
on Earth does that happen?
You need to do this, this,
you have to work hard.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
Yeah.
>> Lisa: You have to do --
and it's a completely
different level
of creating far more
successfully
and far more easily...
>> Whitecloud: Easily.
>> Lisa: ...
on the body.
>> Whitecloud: Absolutely.
>> Lisa: And the mind.
There's a list of people
here that you say are
in your category of natural
success here in terms of genius.
How do you define
the word genius?
>> Whitecloud: Well, you
see, that list there is just
to help people that I teach see
that they're all
different kinds of geniuses.
>> Lisa: Okay.
>> Whitecloud: You see?
So otherwise, they might be
just sitting there with an idea
that Albert Einstein
is a genius.
But Albert Einstein himself
said everyone is a genius,
but if you, you know, try and
teach a fish to climb a tree,
it's going to think
that it's a fool.
It has its own nature
and its own genius,
you know, which is true.
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Whitecloud: If you are out in
nature, you see that all --
everything, every
creature, has a genius.
And so, we're all geniuses.
So that's why I have that list.
>> Lisa: What is the definition
of genius in your opinion?
>> Whitecloud: Well, this
is what I wanted to say
about genius, is that if
you look at the levels
of creativity, you have
a whole lot of levels
like low level imitation,
high level imitation,
low level derivative,
high level derivative.
And then, you have
innovative, inventive,
and then you have genius.
>> Lisa: Okay.
>> Whitecloud: And so,
what the lower levels
of creativity all
have in common is
that they copy something
or somebody else.
It's where you're being
informed by something else,
something with somebody
outside of yourself,
where you're conforming to
preexisting rules, basically.
And then, when you start getting
into, and this is just --
these are academic ideas on the
subject, when you start getting
into innovative inventive,
you start breaking those rules
and start being self-referenced.
And genius, by my definition,
is just simply whereby the --
you throw away all the rules.
You just totally self-reference.
Like Immanuel Kant defined
a genius as somebody
who doesn't have to
be taught anything.
It's not somebody who
hasn't learned anything,
but they make it up totally
by themselves for themselves.
And you'll see -- so
then, you'll see someone
like Richard Branson
in business.
He's a genius because he
hasn't followed any rules.
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Whitecloud: He hasn't gone
to business school or anything.
He's made the game
up for himself.
>> Lisa: I find this a very
progressive conversation.
I just saw this piece on Youtube
with this 13-year-old kid
talking about hack schooling
and how hack schooling is
something that's been created.
It's a completely
alternative way of learning
and there's a day spent on
math and there's a day spent
on spiritual growth and there's
a day spent on technology,
and then there's a day spent
on nature, and they combine --
these are your five days of the
week of your educational
program. And it's like a
self-formed way of education.
This 13-year-old that spoke, I
mean, you could YouTube this,
he was incredibly eloquent.
He was so in touch with himself.
He could give a complete speech
without notes and he was very --
a very centered 13-year-old.
And this is.
>> Whitecloud: The genius.
A genius. Yeah.
>> Lisa: He was a genius.
Yes. At 13.
And to have that type of -- the
perspective that he had and --
oh, the bottom line
about his teaching?
His teaching at 13
was about being happy
and that he didn't want
to achieve the, you know,
the typical job in
order to be happy.
His goal was to be happy while
the process was happening.
>> Whitecloud: Amazing.
>> Lisa: Not to get to
that process of happiness,
but to be happy in that moment.
And compared to, you
know, friends of his
that were not happy at 13 --
bottom line is, there are
different types of geniuses
and I think the progressive age
that we're in, with technology
and how things are speeding up,
this type of genius is
what's required these days.
>> Whitecloud: Well, yeah.
It is.
>> Lisa: It's not necessarily
the traditional type...
>> Whitecloud: It really is.
>> Lisa: ...of it.
Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: I mean -- and
it's not going to help you --
the current education, which
is the traditional education,
isn't helping anybody really.
And it's interesting.
You raised the whole idea
of education and the specter
of education, actually, because,
you see, education's derived,
as you most probably
know, Lisa, it's derived
from the word educare,
which means to bring out of,
to draw forth, bring out
of, draw out of, actually.
You know, it's a
Latin phrase, word.
And, you know, that implies
that in each one of us,
there is something, a
preexisting wisdom, knowledge,
talent, ability, that is
meant to be drawn out of us
that is then what we're going
to really mainly rely to get
through life,
to manage in life.
>> Lisa: Wow.
>> Whitecloud: And yet, they
should invent another word
for the current education system
because they should find some
Latin word which means...
>> Lisa: By rote.
>> Whitecloud: ...to stuff
down your throat, you see.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: Not to draw out
of, but to push down, to --
so that you just get taught
these blocks of algebra
and English and --
as if, you know.
>> Lisa: And you have
to spit them back out.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: Spit them
back out and so, you know,
the skill often that they're
teaching is not to do --
anything to do with creativity,
but just to basically
to learn how to cram for
tests and that sort of thing.
So there's no creativity
or genius being inspired
in hardly anybody
on this planet.
And yet, we are a planet
of seven billion
geniuses, is the truth.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
Is your mission.
So I understand that completely
because I have a young daughter
in school and I see that
system coming through her
and spitting it out on tests
and she can't tell you what
she learned the year before
because of the way
that it is taught.
So the way the end result of all
of this, what is the end result
of this that you're teaching?
>> Whitecloud: Well,
the end result is --
the end result of what
I'm teaching is to --
rather than come from a
conditioned consciousness,
because we're all conditioned,
and that's not a judgment or,
you know, any kind of
derisive statement.
It's just a fact, is that
we all have rational minds
which are trying to help
us figure out how to go
through life and work out
how it is here and come
up with some kind of
system of how it is
so that we can then just
know how to operate.
But the trouble is
-- with that is --
that system, is that
we have experiences,
formative experiences basically,
that we then latch onto and go,
well, this is how it is.
You know, if you ask for
candy, you will be punished
or just whatever it is.
If you experience affection,
this will be the consequence,
which has no actual truth to it.
It just was an experience.
>> Lisa: It's as you saying.
The people, when you
take them on the safaris,
they have these contexts that
they live their lives by.
>> Whitecloud: Which were...
>> Lisa: That's where
they're formed.
>> Whitecloud: ...formed
through experience.
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Whitecloud: Where we have
these formative experiences
and then we take on, from
those, ideas about how it is.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Whitecloud: And then, those
establish rules by which we...
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Whitecloud: ...live, exactly.
You see? And then, they
limit us incredibly.
We have personal rules.
We have societal rules,
all of which limit
us incredibly.
And so, the end result
of all what I am about
and what I support others in
is this alchemical process
of making that fixed volatile
of breaking that down,
being able to rise up above
that to a higher perspective
of seeing not how it's
really is or how, you know,
and definitively --
the definitive truth,
but the truth in the moment.
What's the truth
now in this moment?
What's the way now?
What's the true -- what's the
highest perspective I can have
in this situation?
What's the highest action I
can take in this situation?
And operate from this
higher perspective.
>> Lisa: You have.
>> Whitecloud: And follow
through on this higher
perspective.
>> Lisa: There's a
slide here -- oh, sorry.
Go ahead.
>> Whitecloud: No.
Well, sorry.
Which makes an incredible
difference in a person's life
when you do -- have this
education, the true education,
and are able to rely -- to bring
forth what is inside of you,
rely on that, and follow
that, then, you know,
the magic we were talking about
before becomes really real.
And as I say, it makes
such a massive difference
in your own life.
And then, also -- but also for
everything around you.
It also serves the environment
that you're a part of.
>> Lisa: There's different
ways of looking at life, right?
And we have -- prior to
your conversation here,
you talk about two
major misconceptions
that we look at life
from, right?
What are those misconceptions?
>> Whitecloud: Well, is that --
I think the most
fundamental misconception
that virtually everyone
on the planet is subject
to until they wake up
to it is that we have
to have everything worked out.
We have to know everything.
And that's why you get
books that are very popular,
like A Short History of the
World
or The Book About Everything.
>> Lisa: How tos.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: You know?
And metaphysics as
well, you know.
These.
>> Lisa: Five steps to
this, 10 steps to that.
Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: Ideas about
this is how the world is.
And rationally, we're
looking for that.
You know, we all
have egoic natures
and our egos are our
vehicles of orientation.
They're there to work out
how it is and thereby know --
by knowing how it is,
know how to operate here.
But the trouble is, that
that then hooks you,
and it's quite insidious
because that then just hooks you
into a limited idea
of how it is,
that you become dedicated to.
You know, Gandhi
said, "I'm dedicated
to the truth, not
to consistency."
But egoically, we become very
dedicated to consistency.
We work out how it is and
then we create a pattern
of that experience and we
want proof of that and we want
to be dedicated to
that consistency.
And so, really, the most
functional way you can live
in life is to be
open-minded and...
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: ...really, you
know, it's like you and I,
were having this conversation
before we came on camera
where you were saying about how
you reach levels where you need
to know new levels of -- come
to new levels of awareness
or have new levels
of information.
And those then become
presented to you.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Whitecloud: And that's
actually how we're meant
to live.
>> Lisa: That's amazing.
Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: You know,
in a way that we opened.
And through that openness,
receive these new levels
of information and
awareness that help us then...
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: ...function
functionally...
>> Lisa: I was...
>> Whitecloud: ...in life.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
I was talking about
how the old ways
of creating aren't necessarily
working any longer, where we set
up structures and
systems and graphs
and projections and so forth.
And that does keep
us safe in the world.
It's predictable.
We set a goal and then
we have a result, right?
This is what keeps us, in
a way, safe in the world.
When you start to create in the
way that you're talking about,
where you are open to the
possibilities of things coming
to you, where things flow in
that place of ease and grace
and they just happen and they
work, threatens our safety.
Talk to me about that.
And I do create and I'm
learning to create...
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
>> Lisa: ...in this new way.
So I'd like to know,
when I get back
into that survival struggle way
of creating, how do I let go
of the safety that that
appears to have given me
and completely throw that out
and go towards that blind faith?
>> Whitecloud: Well, you see, I
mean, that's call vulnerability.
And living as a genius
and living
as a creator is a
vulnerable state,
which a lot of creators will
then try and cope with by,
you know, drinking or taking
drugs, and then actually end
up killing their creativity.
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Whitecloud: Because the
creative state is a vulnerable
state, as you've
just expressed now.
And, you see, the
thing about it is
that we do have these structures
that you're referring to.
We do have established ways
of looking at life and dealing
with life that we have
established to defend ourselves
and to be -- approach
life safely.
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Whitecloud: The trouble is
that they're actually
not really safe.
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Whitecloud: They're
not productive.
For most people, their
structures actually keep them
in poverty, keep them in, you
know, keep them in danger,
keep them, as I just said,
in poverty or keep them
in abusive relationships
or whatever.
>> Lisa: Or a constrictive
way of thinking.
>> Whitecloud: Or
constrictive way of thinking.
Exactly. So really, to
be most viable in life is
to open ourselves up to
a higher perspective.
It just feels to us we
have always hung on...
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Whitecloud: ...to our
limited way of seeing things
for supposed survival reasons.
It only seems as though,
then, when we abandon that,
that we're letting go
of safety -- excuse me.
The fact is that we're not.
We're actually going into a
higher level of viability.
>> Lisa: Ah.
Go -- I'm thinking in
terms of maybe a corporation
or a business structure,
where you do have certain
structures and so forth.
And what you're proposing here,
and you say it in this slide,
the second premise of
what you're proposing is
that we make it all up.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
>> Lisa: Tell that
to a stockholder.
Oh, we're just going to make
up this year. [laughter]
>> Whitecloud: Well, you know,
who built the biggest
corporation in history
by stockholder value,
by turnover?
Steve Jobs, Apple.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
I was just thinking of that.
>> Whitecloud: And
what did he do?
He just made it up.
>> Lisa: Made it up.
Based on heart.
>> Whitecloud: He
just made it up.
Whatever he based it on, he's
very vilified and, you know,
I'm not here to defend
his personal life
or his personal character
and that.
But if you look at his
success and his achievement...
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Whitecloud: ...he -- and we
could name hundreds of people,
but, I mean, he's, I
think, the most well known.
And the arch exponent of
this, he made up, you know,
when he said we're
going to have shops,
people said you can't
have Apple shops.
You only got 10 things to sell.
You can't do that.
>> Lisa: What -- he thought of
the personal computer at home.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
>> Lisa: It was a
completely foreign idea.
>> Whitecloud: The chairman
of IBM famously said,
"The market for personal
computers is five."
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Whitecloud: You see?
So he just made these things up
about, well, what can I make up?
What would I love to make
up that can make
people's lives different,
that can serve people's lives?
>> Lisa: I saw recently
a biography on him
and he was a stratospheric
visionary.
>> Whitecloud: He was.
>> Lisa: Now, there was
a cost for that for him,
but he had levels of
thinking that were not even
in the current domain
of reality,
and that's where most
corporations these days
are thinking.
I mean, think about -- look
at Amazon, who's just come
out with the Droids and stuff.
But there is a cost to progress,
as there always has been,
but if you look at
that level of thinking,
that's what we're
talking about applying
to your regular everyday life.
>> Whitecloud: Yes.
>> Lisa: And it takes blowing
apart the current reality
that you're living in.
>> Whitecloud: Exactly.
And I don't think
there has to be a cost.
You see, I think that's just
something else we have made up
and just another belief.
Because if you approach
it in a structured way,
as alchemy teaches us to
do, there isn't a cost.
There's just -- it's
just win-win.
You begin creating in
a situation where --
you see, Steve Jobs did a lot
of what he did, if I can speak
to him, because I
-- speak for him,
because I didn't
know him personally.
But, you know, I think it's
quite obvious when you just look
at it that by the conflict
that he had in his life
and the problems that
also followed him,
that he wasn't an
educated creator.
He was an instinctive creator.
But you can actually
learn to create in a way
that eliminates conflict
and that actually eliminates
risk and eliminates...
>> Lisa: Wow.
>> Whitecloud: ...the cost.
Where you can create in a way
where there's just
upside and just win-win.
Because, you see, your
genius is pulling everything
together perfectly.
It knows your higher
nature, your higher mind,
has an eagle eye vision of
everything and it knows how to
pull everything together in a
very holistic, synergistic way.
And if you're in touch with
that and follow its path,
then you can do this in a
very sort of uplifted way,
I would say, without the kind of
costs that you're referring to.
>> Lisa: It's interesting.
And you mentioned
in this next slide
that our definition
creates our reality.
And this comes to mind, anybody
who was raised in an environment
where there was a
lot of survival
and there was survival coping
skills that were created
to -- in order to survive.
So anybody who had an abusive
relationship or a painful past,
out of an effort to actually
survive, you make up a lot
of your own reality
in order to survive.
>> Whitecloud: Sure.
>> Lisa: Those people tend
to be our visionaries,
tend to have the
most tragic past
because they were
really making it
up as they went along
in order to live.
And look at the people that
have created things, you know,
like the personal
computer or, you know,
entertainment in airplanes.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
>> Lisa: I'm talking
about Richard Branson.
So it's an interesting --
how you create a result
out of something like that,
and it comes with
looking at life
through an ever-changing lens.
>> Whitecloud: The profound
truth that our perception
of life is created by any --
the definitions that we hold.
So whatever definitions that
we hold in our consciousness,
whether consciously
or unconsciously,
then attracts the
reality that we perceive.
So if we are holding
definitions, for instance,
that we are unsafe, we will
start to see how unsafe we are.
Or if we, you know,
are holding definitions
that we are not worthy,
then we'll start to see
that playing out, they are
reflected to us in the world.
Whatever definitions, whatever
the definitions that we hold,
then, you know, create
the reality we perceive.
And I do this exercise
in the work I do
where I sit people opposite
each other and get them
to imagine different
definitions,
just define each
other differently.
And it's a very simple exercise,
but they're absolutely shocked
by what they experience because
every time the definition
changes, their whole
feeling changes,
the look on the person's
face changes.
>> Lisa: Ah.
>> Whitecloud: There's
a whole shapeshifting effect.
>> Lisa: Because we
identify ourselves.
>> Whitecloud: And
people go, oh my God.
The reality I'm experiencing
out there isn't actual reality.
It's geared by however
I'm defining myself,
others or the world is
creating my perception.
>> Lisa: My perception.
>> Whitecloud: Very
powerful realization.
>> Lisa: And that's huge.
And that's.
>> Whitecloud: It's massive.
>> Lisa: As you said earlier,
your focus creates your reality.
>> Whitecloud: Yeah.
>> Lisa: So whatever you're
focused on, be it fear
or safety, it will create
the constrict of the reality
at that particular time.
That what we've been talking
about this entire show,
which I absolutely
love, is the --
is breaking outside of
that reality and creating
at a totally different level,
which is what you define
as natural success.
>> Whitecloud: Yes.
Yeah.
>> Lisa: And it's creating
from that space of miracle.
But you seem to have another
piece to it, other than miracle,
which I -- in my baby
steps here, I'm learning
that I look at it as a miracle.
But you're saying that it's
something other than a miracle.
You're saying it's intentional.
>> Whitecloud: Well,
it's intentional,
but it is a miracle,
nevertheless.
So, you see, the -- what we were
talking about earlier, before,
was about making
the fixed volatile,
breaking down your egoic
construct and perception,
is the ability to self
consciously stop identifying
with the definitions that you
have in place about yourself,
others in the world,
life, how you think it is,
where you can let go of that.
And when you do, when that
breaks down, then you do enter
into what we call innocence
in a sense, out of --
outside of thoughts
and feelings,
into an open vulnerable
state in which, then,
whatever perspective is highest
for you to have to be effective
in any time and place and
moment becomes available to you,
for you to -- as a perception
and then also as actions
to follow through on and
basically a direction of that,
and just a higher direction in
life.
>> Lisa: So the entire point
here is our focus creates our
reality, and that is
exactly what you were talking
about in this entire show.
>> Whitecloud: Yes.
>> Lisa: So that
makes perfect sense.
Well, thank you so much
for being here and all
that you shared with us.
And I really hope that you got
this incredibly different way
of looking at how to
create and I certainly have.
So thank you very much
for joining me today.
>> Whitecloud: Thanks, Lisa.
It was a great conversation.
Thoroughly enjoyed myself.
>> Lisa: Me, too.
Me, too.
>> Whitecloud: And I hope
you and John will come
to Africa with me one day.
>> Lisa: That sounds amazing.
>> Whitecloud: And
experience what I was sharing
with you before.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
It sounds amazing.
Absolutely.
Well, if you would like to
watch a replay of my interview
with William Whitecloud
or share it with your
friends, go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invited you to stay inspired.
[ Music ]